Java: Docs MaD using extensions. (#12410)
github/codeql: docs/codeql/codeql-language-guides/customizing-library-models-for-java.rst

.. _customizing-library-models-for-java:

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

:orphan:
:nosearch:

```

Customizing Library Models for Java
===================================

.. include:: ../reusables/beta-note-customizing-library-models.rst

The Java analysis can be customized by adding library models (summaries, sinks and sources) in data extension files.

A data extension file for Java is a YAML file in the form:

.. code-block:: yaml

   extensions:
     - addsTo:
         pack: codeql/java-all

>          extensible: <name of extension point>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         extensible: <name of extensible predicate>
```

Reviewer: I think that term needs to be changed in the JS docs as well.

       data:
         - <tuple1>
         - <tuple2>
         - ...

> The data extension can contribute to the following extension points:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data extension can contribute to the following extensible predicates:
```

Reviewer: Or maybe something a little more verbose (with the expectation that a full description will be supplied in a link).

```suggestion
Data extensions contribute to extensible predicates defined CodeQL libraries. For more information on how to define data extensions and extensible predicates as well as how to wire them up, see the following documentation...

The CodeQL libraries for Java expose the following extensible predicates:
```

- **sourceModel**\(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, output, kind, provenance)
- **sinkModel**\(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, input, kind, provenance)
- **summaryModel**\(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, input, output, kind, provenance)
- **neutralModel**\(package, type, name, signature, provenance)

TODO: Link or inline documentation on how to add dataextensions.
Are we going for extensions packs as the recommended default?

> If yes, then we probably need to elaborate with a concrete example.

Reviewer: In order to avoid duplication, we should probably be including links, though a one sentence description of what an extensible predicate is would be helpful.

Author: I will add a link to a reusable (like the beta notice).

Author: To avoid making this an eternity PR, should we just add a quote in the reusable stating that the data extensions is documented in a google doc for now?

Reviewer: > To avoid making this an eternity PR, should we just add a quote in the reusable stating that the data extensions is documented in a google doc for now?

Yes!

> In the sections below, we will show by example how to add tuples to the different extension points.

Reviewer: Can you replace `extension points` with `extensible predicates` in the whole document?

```suggestion
In the sections below, we will show by example how to add tuples to the different extensible predicates.
```

The extension points are used to customize and improve the existing dataflow queries, by providing sources, sinks, and flow through for library elements.

> The **Reference material** section will in more detail describe the *mini DSLs* that are used to comprise a model definition for each extension point.

Reviewer: This sentence is a little awkward. Is this better?

```suggestion
The **Reference material** section will provide details on the *mini DSLs* that define models for each extensible predicate.
```

Example: Taint sink in the **java.sql** package.
------------------------------------------------

> In this example we will see, how to define the argument of the **execute** method as a SQL injection sink.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example we will show how to model the argument of the **execute** method as a SQL injection sink.
```

This is the **execute** method in the **Statement** class, which is located in the **java.sql** package.
Please note that this sink is already added to the CodeQL Java analysis.

.. code-block:: java

   public static void taintsink(Connection conn, String query) throws SQLException {
       Statement stmt = conn.createStatement();
       stmt.execute(query); // The argument to this method is a SQL injection sink.
   }

> This can be achieved by adding the following data extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be achieved by adding the following row to a data extension file:
```

.. code-block:: yaml

   extensions:
     - addsTo:
         pack: codeql/java-all
         extensible: sinkModel
       data:
         - ["java.sql", "Statement", True, "execute", "(String)", "", "Argument[0]", "sql", "manual"]

Reasoning:

Since we are adding a new sink, we need to add a tuple to the **sinkModel** extension point.

> The first five values are used to identify the method (callable) which we are defining a sink on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first five values identify the callable (in this case a method) to be modeled as a sink.
```

- The first value **java.sql** is the package name.

> - The second value **Statement** is the class (type) name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The second value **Statement** is the name of the class (type) that contains the method.
```

> - The third value **True** is flag indicating, whether the sink also applies to all overrides of the method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The third value **True** is a flag that indicates, whether or not the sink also applies to all overrides of the method.
```

- The fourth value **execute** is the method name.
- The fifth value **(String)** is the method input type signature.

For most practical purposes the sixth value is not relevant.
The remaining values are used to define the **access path**, the **kind**, and the **provenance** (origin) of the sink.

- The seventh value **Argument[0]** is the **access path** to the first argument passed to the method, which means that this is the location of the sink.
- The eighth value **sql** is the kind of the sink. The sink kind is used to define the queries where the sink is in scope. In this case  - the SQL injection queries.

> - The ninth value **manual** is the provenance of the sink, which is used to identify the origin of the sink.

Reviewer: Presumably, all hand written sinks should be `manual`. What other values can there be?

 
Example: Taint source from the **java.net** package.
----------------------------------------------------

> In this example we will see, how to define the return value from the **getInputStream** method as a **remote** source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example we show how to model the return value from the **getInputStream** method as a **remote** source.
```

This is the **getInputStream** method in the **Socket** class, which is located in the **java.net** package.
Please note that this source is already added to the CodeQL Java analysis.

.. code-block:: java

   public static InputStream tainted(Socket socket) throws IOException {
       InputStream stream = socket.getInputStream(); // The return value of this method is a remote source of taint.
       return stream;
   }

This can be achieved by adding the following data extension.

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/java-all
        extensible: sourceModel
      data:
        - ["java.net", "Socket", False, "getInputStream", "()", "", "ReturnValue", "remote", "manual"]

Reasoning:

Since we are adding a new source, we need to add a tuple to the **sourceModel** extension point.
The first five values are used to identify the method (callable) which we are defining a source on.

> - The first value **java.net** is the package name.
> - The second value **Socket** is the class (type) name.
> - The third value **False** is flag indicating, whether the source also applies to all overrides of the method.
> - The fourth value **getInputStream** is the method name.
> - The fifth value **()** is the method input type signature.

Reviewer: Same comments as above.
```suggestion
- The first value **java.net** is the package name.
- The second value **Socket** is the name of the class (type) that contains the source.
- The third value **False** flag indicates, whether or not the source also applies to all overrides of the method.
- The fourth value **getInputStream** is the method name.
- The fifth value **()** is the method input type signature.
```

For most practical purposes the sixth value is not relevant.
The remaining values are used to define the **access path**, the **kind**, and the **provenance** (origin) of the source.

- The seventh value **ReturnValue** is the access path to the return of the method, which means that it is the return value that should be considered a source of tainted input.
- The eighth value **remote** is the kind of the source. The source kind is used to define the queries where the source is in scope. **remote** applies to many of security related queries as it means a remote source of untrusted data. As an example the SQL injection query uses **remote** sources.

> - The ninth value **manual** is the provenance of the source, which is used to identify the origin of the source.

Reviewer: Can you enumerate the potential values for both of these somewhere? (Even if users will only manually enter `remote` and `manual`?

Example: Add flow through the **concat** method.
------------------------------------------------

> In this example we will see, how to define flow through a method for a simple case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example we show how to model flow through a method for a simple case.
```

       pack: codeql/java-all
       extensible: neutralModel
     data:
       - ["java.time", "Instant", "now", "()", "manual"]

Reasoning:

Since we are adding a neutral model, we need to add tuples to the **neutralModel** extension point.
The first four values are used to identify the method (callable) which we are defining as a neutral and the fifth value is the provenance (origin) of the neutral.

- The first value **java.time** is the package name.
- The second value **Instant** is the class (type) name.
- The third value **now** is the method name.
- The fourth value **()** is the method input type signature.
- The fifth value **manual** is the provenance of the neutral.

Reference material
------------------

The following sections provide reference material for extension points.
This includes descriptions of each of the arguments (eg. access paths, kinds and provenance).

Extension points
----------------

Below is a description of the columns for each extension point.
Sources, Sinks, Summaries and Neutrals are commonly known as Models.
The semantics of many of the columns of the extension points are shared.

The shared columns are:

- **package**: Name of the package.

> - **type**: Name of the type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **type**: Name of the type containing the element to be modeled.
```

(This is necessary to distinguish from other types involved with the modeled element, like return type, etc).

> - **subtypes**: A flag indicating whether the model should also apply to all overrides of the selected element(s).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **subtypes**: A boolean flag indicating whether the model should also apply to all overrides of the selected element(s).
```

- **name**: Name of the element (optional). If this is left blank, it means all elements matching the previous selection criteria.
- **signature**: Type signature of the selected element (optional). If this is left blank it means all elements matching the previous selection criteria.
- **ext**: Specifies additional API-graph-like edges (mostly empty) and out of scope for this document.
- **provenance**: Provenance (origin) of the model definition.

The columns **package**, **type**, **subtypes**, **name**, and **signature** are used to select the element(s) that the model applies to.

> The section Access paths describes in more detail, how access paths are composed.

Reviewer: Should there be a link here?

```suggestion
The Access Paths section describes how access paths are composed.
```

> This is the most complicated part of the extension points and the **mini DSL** for access paths is shared accross the extension points.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the most complicated part of the extension points and the **mini DSL** for access paths is shared across all extension points.
```

- **input**: Access path to the input of the element (where data will flow to the output).
- **output**: Access path to the output of the element (where data will flow from the input).
- **kind**: Kind of the flow through.
- **provenance**: Provenance (origin) of the flow through.

The following kinds are supported:

- **taint**: This means the output is not necessarily equal to the input, but it was derived from the input in an unrestrictive way. An attacker who controls the input will have significant control over the output as well.
- **value**: This means that the output equals the input or a copy of the input such that all of its properties are preserved.

neutralModel(package, type, name, signature, provenance)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Access paths
------------
The **input**, and **output** columns consist of a **.**-separated list of components, which is evaluted from left to right, with each step selecting a new set of values derived from the previous set of values.

The following components are supported:

- **Argument[**\ `n`\ **]** selects the argument at index `n` (zero-indexed).

> - **Argument[**\ `-1`\ **]** selects the qualifier.

Reviewer: I don't understand what a qualifier means in this case. Is it `this`?

> - **Argument[**\ `n1..n2`\ **]** selects the arguments in the given range (both ends included).

Reviewer: How do you specify all arguments? What about varargs?

Author: I don't think that has been implemented for Java. You need to be explicit. Some languages has implemented support for eg. `Argument[any]` or `Argument[0..]` (open ended intervals), but AFAIK this is not the case for Java (there are quite a lot of discrepancies between the modelling capabilities of the different languages).

Reviewer: Thanks for the explanation. I can see these subtleties as a source for confusion. When we roll out docs for other languages, it would be nice to have a location where we document all the discrepancies between the languages.

Author: Yes, that is an interesting idea, but I am not sure whether that is important for external users.
I would imagine that if you are a security researcher (or similar persona) in an organisation then most likely you are only working with one - maybe two languages (I have no information to back up this claim - do you know anything about this @coadaflorin ?).
However, for internal purposes it would be interesting to uncover these differences as these might simply be development gaps and ideas that were not ported between the languages.

Reviewer 2: FWIW, varargs are extracted as a single array argument, so you can select them by using the syntax `Argument[n]` where `n` is the last argument.

Author: Ups yes - I didn't answer that part! Thank you @atorralba !

Reviewer: > internal purposes it would be interesting to uncover these differences as these might simply be development gaps and ideas that were not ported between the languages.

I think that's fine. These are not meant to be publicly facing docs (even though they are in a public repo), so we don't require the same level of completeness for them. Though, these differences are something that we should be aware of, especially when we do a public release.

- **Parameter[**\ `n`\ **]** selects the parameter at index `n` (zero-indexed).
- **Parameter[**\ `n1..n2`\ **]** selects the parameters in the given range (both ends included).
- **ReturnValue** selects the return value.
- **Field[**\ `name`\ **]** selects the field with the fully qualified name `name`.
- **SyntheticField[**\ `name`\ **]** selects the synthetic field with name `name`.

> - **ArrayElement** selects the elements of an array.

Reviewer: Can you specify indexes into an array? like `ArrayElement[0..2]`?

- **Element** selects the elements of a collection-like container.
- **MapKey** selects the element keys of a map.
- **MapValue** selects the element values of a map.

Provenance
----------

The **provenance** column is used to specify the provenance (origin) of the model definition.

The following values are supported:

- **manual**: The model was manually created (or verified by a human) and added to the extension point.
- **generated**: The model was generated by the model generator and added to the extension point.
- **ai-generated**: The model was generated by AI and added to the extension point.

The provenance is used to distinguish between models that are manually added to the extension point and models that are automatically generated.

> Furthermore, it impacts the dataflow analysis in the following way

Reviewer: Is it an error to supply custom provenances? If not what is the behaviour in this case?

.. _customizing-library-models-for-java:

:orphan:
:nosearch:

Customizing Library Models for Java
===================================

.. include:: ../reusables/beta-note-customizing-library-models.rst

> The Java analysis can be customized by adding library models (summaries, sinks and sources) in data extension files.

Reviewer 3: Are the terms summary, sink, source known to the target audience? I guess the answer is 'yes', just to confirm.

Author: This is a good point and there is a similar comment below.
I will elaborate a bit more!

A data extension file for Java is a YAML file in the form:

.. code-block:: yaml

   extensions:
     - addsTo:
         pack: codeql/java-all
         extensible: <name of extensible predicate>
       data:
         - <tuple1>
         - <tuple2>
         - ...

Data extensions contribute to extensible predicates defined CodeQL libraries. For more information on how to define data extensions and extensible predicates as well as how to wire them up, see the :ref:`data-extensions` documentation.

The CodeQL libraries for Java expose the following extensible predicates:

- **sourceModel**\(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, output, kind, provenance)
- **sinkModel**\(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, input, kind, provenance)
- **summaryModel**\(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, input, output, kind, provenance)
- **neutralModel**\(package, type, name, signature, provenance)

> 

Reviewer 4: @michaelnebel are there any places in the doc we could point a user to a definition for a source, sink, etc? I see someone coming across this document at a future point trying to model a library and not being sure about what source, sink, summary or neutral model refers to.

Author: Good point and similar to @kaeluka 's comment. I will provide a bit more detail, but I would like to keep the scope focus on the model definitions. If it turns out that we need more extensive documentation of *taint tracking*, *sources*, *sinks*, *summaries* it should probably be documented elsewhere.

.. code-block:: java

   public static void taintsink(Connection conn, String query) throws SQLException {
       Statement stmt = conn.createStatement();
       stmt.execute(query); // The argument to this method is a SQL injection sink.
   }

This can be achieved by adding the following row to a data extension file:

.. code-block:: yaml

   extensions:
     - addsTo:
         pack: codeql/java-all
         extensible: sinkModel
       data:
         - ["java.sql", "Statement", True, "execute", "(String)", "", "Argument[0]", "sql", "manual"]

Reasoning:

Since we are adding a new sink, we need to add a tuple to the **sinkModel** extensible predicate.
The first five values identify the callable (in this case a method) to be modeled as a sink.

- The first value **java.sql** is the package name.
- The second value **Statement** is the name of the class (type) that contains the method.
- The third value **True** is a flag that indicates whether or not the sink also applies to all overrides of the method.
- The fourth value **execute** is the method name.
- The fifth value **(String)** is the method input type signature.

> For most practical purposes the sixth value is not relevant.

Author: There is brief description in the reference material section.

> For most practical purposes the sixth value is not relevant.

Reviewer: How about something like this?

```suggestion
The sixth value is only relevant internally and can be omitted in most use cases.
```

The remaining values are used to define the **access path**, the **kind**, and the **provenance** (origin) of the sink.

- The seventh value **Argument[0]** is the **access path** to the first argument passed to the method, which means that this is the location of the sink.
- The eighth value **sql** is the kind of the sink. The sink kind is used to define the queries where the sink is in scope. In this case  - the SQL injection queries.
- The ninth value **manual** is the provenance of the sink, which is used to identify the origin of the sink.
 
Example: Taint source from the **java.net** package.
----------------------------------------------------
In this example we show how to model the return value from the **getInputStream** method as a **remote** source.
This is the **getInputStream** method in the **Socket** class, which is located in the **java.net** package.
Please note that this source is already added to the CodeQL Java analysis.

.. code-block:: java

   public static InputStream tainted(Socket socket) throws IOException {
       InputStream stream = socket.getInputStream(); // The return value of this method is a remote source of taint.
       return stream;
   }

> This can be achieved by adding the following data extension.

Author: Yes, that makes sense - I will add that - and do the same in the other sections.

- The fourth value **getInputStream** is the method name.
- The fifth value **()** is the method input type signature.

The sixth value should be left empty and is out of scope for this documentation.
The remaining values are used to define the **access path**, the **kind**, and the **provenance** (origin) of the source.

- The seventh value **ReturnValue** is the access path to the return of the method, which means that it is the return value that should be considered a source of tainted input.
- The eighth value **remote** is the kind of the source. The source kind is used to define the queries where the source is in scope. **remote** applies to many of the security related queries as it means a remote source of untrusted data. As an example the SQL injection query uses **remote** sources.
- The ninth value **manual** is the provenance of the source, which is used to identify the origin of the source.

Example: Add flow through the **concat** method
------------------------------------------------
In this example we show how to model flow through a method for a simple case.
This pattern covers many of the cases where we need to define flow through a method.

> Please note that the flow through the **concat** method is already added to the CodeQL Java analysis.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Note that the flow through the **concat** method is already added to the CodeQL Java analysis.
```

- The fifth value **(String)** is the method input type signature.

The sixth value should be left empty and is out of scope for this documentation.
The remaining values are used to define the **access path**, the **kind**, and the **provenance** (origin) of the summary.

- The seventh value is the access path to the input (where data flows from). **Argument[this]** is the access path to the qualifier (**s1** in the example) and **Argument[0]** is the access path to the first argument (**s2** in the example).
- The eighth value **ReturnValue** is the access path to the output (where data flows to), in this case **ReturnValue**, which means that the input flows to the return value.
- The ninth value **taint** is the kind of the flow. **taint** means that taint is propagated through the call.
- The tenth value **manual** is the provenance of the summary, which is used to identify the origin of the summary.

Example: Add flow through the **map** method
---------------------------------------------
In this example, we will see a more complex example of modeling flow through a method.
This pattern shows how to model flow through higher order methods and collection types.

> Please note that the flow through the **map** method is already added to the CodeQL Java analysis.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Note that the flow through the **map** method is already added to the CodeQL Java analysis.
```

Most of the security related queries are *taint tracking* queries that tries to find paths from a *source* of untrusted input to a *sink* that represents a vulnerability.
Furthermore, the taint tracking queries also need to know how data can flow through elements that are not included in the source code - these are named *summaries*.

That is

- **sources** are the starting points of a taint tracking data flow analysis.
- **sinks** are the end points of a taint tracking data flow analysis.
- **summaries** are models of elements that allows us to synthesize the elements flow behavior without having them in the source code. This is especially helpful when using a third party (or the standard) library.

The models are defined using data extensions where each tuple constitutes a model.
A data extension file for Java is a YAML file in the form:

.. code-block:: yaml

   extensions:
     - addsTo:
         pack: codeql/java-all
         extensible: <name of extensible predicate>
       data:
         - <tuple1>
         - <tuple2>
         - ...

> Data extensions contribute to the extensible predicates defined in the CodeQL library. For more information on how to define data extensions and extensible predicates as well as how to wire them up, see the :ref:`data-extensions` documentation.

Reviewer: This documentation will live in a google doc for now. This suggestion is just removing a broken link.

```suggestion
Data extensions contribute to the extensible predicates defined in the CodeQL library. For more information on how to define data extensions and extensible predicates as well as how to wire them up, see the data-extensions documentation.
```

Author: This is a link a section in this documentation is currently empty, but re-usable (I will add a description in that the information is currently in a google doc).

> The CodeQL library for Java expose the following extensible predicates:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CodeQL library for Java exposes the following extensible predicates:
```

- **sourceModel**\(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, output, kind, provenance). This is used for **source** models.
- **sinkModel**\(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, input, kind, provenance). This is used for **sink** models.
- **summaryModel**\(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, input, output, kind, provenance). This is used for **summary** models.
- **neutralModel**\(package, type, name, signature, provenance). This is used for **neutral** models, which does not impact the data flow analysis, but it is included here for completeness.

The extensible predicates are populated using data extensions specified in YAML files.

> In the sections below, we will show by example how to add tuples to the different extensible predicates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the sections below, we will provide examples of how to add tuples to the different extensible predicates.
```

The extensible predicates are used to customize and improve the existing data flow queries, by providing sources, sinks, and flow through (summaries) for library elements.

> The :ref:`reference-material` section will provide details on the *mini DSLs* that define models for each extensible predicate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :ref:`reference-material` section will provide details on the *mini DSLs* that defines models for each extensible predicate.
```

- The seventh value is **Argument[0].ReturnValue**, which is the access path to the return value of the **Function** argument of **map** (the return value of the lambda in the example).
- The eighth value is **ReturnValue.Element**, which is the access path to the elements of the return value of **map** (the elements of the stream **l** in the example).

The remaining values for both rows

- The ninth value **value** is the kind of the flow. **value** means that the value is preserved.
- The tenth value **manual** is the provenance of the summary, which is used to identify the origin of the summary.

That is, the first row models that there is value flow from the elements of the qualifier stream into the first argument of the Function provided to **map** and the second row models that there is value flow from the return value of the Function to the elements of the stream returned from **map**.

Example: Add a **neutral** method.
----------------------------------
In this example we will show how to model the **now** method as being neutral.
This is purely for consistency and has no impact on the analysis.
A neutral model is used to define that there is no flow through a method.

> Please note that the neutral model for the **now** method is already added.

Author: In this case the wording is intentional :-)
The neutrals have no impact on the analysis.

       Instant t = Instant.now(); // There is no flow from now to t.
       ...
   }

This means that we want to add a tuple to the **neutralModel**\(package, type, name, signature, provenance) extensible predicate, which can be achieved by adding the following to a data extension file:

.. code-block:: yaml

   extensions:
   - addsTo:
       pack: codeql/java-all
       extensible: neutralModel
     data:
       - ["java.time", "Instant", "now", "()", "manual"]

Reasoning:

Since we are adding a neutral model, we need to add tuples to the **neutralModel** extensible predicate.
The first five values identify the callable (in this case a method) to be modeled as a neutral and the fifth value is the provenance (origin) of the neutral.

- The first value **java.time** is the package name.
- The second value **Instant** is the class (type) name.
- The third value **now** is the method name.
- The fourth value **()** is the method input type signature.
- The fifth value **manual** is the provenance of the neutral.

.. _reference-material:

Reference material
------------------

The following sections provide reference material for extensible predicates.

> This includes descriptions of each of the arguments (eg. access paths, kinds and provenance).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This includes descriptions of each of the arguments (e.g. access paths, kinds and provenance).
```

Extensible predicates
---------------------

Below is a description of the columns for each extensible predicate.
Sources, Sinks, Summaries and Neutrals are commonly known as Models.
The semantics of many of the columns of the extensible predicates are shared.

The shared columns are:

- **package**: Name of the package containing the element(s) to be modeled.
- **type**: Name of the type containing the element(s) to be modeled.
- **subtypes**: A boolean flag indicating whether the model should also apply to all overrides of the selected element(s).
- **name**: Name of the element (optional). If this is left blank, it means all elements matching the previous selection criteria.

> - **signature**: Type signature of the selected element (optional). If this is left blank it means all elements matching the previous selection criteria.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- **signature**: Type signature of the selected element (optional). If this is left blank, it means all elements matching the previous selection criteria.
```

- **contentprovider**: ?
- **android-widget**: ?
- **android-external-storage-dir**: ?

sinkModel(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, input, kind, provenance)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Taint sink. As opposed to source kinds, there are many different kinds of sinks as these tend to be more query specific.

- **input**: Access path to the sink, where we want to check if tainted data can flow into.
- **kind**: Kind of the sink.

The following sink kinds are supported:

- **open-url**: ?
- **jndi-injection**: ?
- **ldap**: ?
- **sql**: ?
- **jdbc-url**: ?
- **logging**: ?
- **mvel**: ?
- **xpath**: ?
- **groovy**: ?
- **xss**: ?
- **ognl-injection**: ?
- **intent-start**: ?
- **pending-intent-sent**: ?
- **url-open-stream**: ?
- **url-redirect**: ?
- **create-file**: ?
- **read-file**: ?
- **write-file**: ?
- **set-hostname-verifier**: ?
- **header-splitting**: ?
- **information-leak**: ?
- **xslt**: ?
- **jexl**: ?
- **bean-validation**: ?
- **ssti**: ?

> - **fragment-injection**: ?

Reviewer 6: Is the exclusion of the `regex-use%` sink kind from the above list intentional?

Author: No! Good catch!

summaryModel(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, input, output, kind, provenance)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Flow through (summary). This extensible predicate is used to model flow through elements.

- **input**: Access path to the input of the element (where data will flow from to the output).
- **output**: Access path to the output of the element (where data will flow to from the input).
- **kind**: Kind of the flow through.
- **provenance**: Provenance (origin) of the flow through.

The following kinds are supported:

- **taint**: This means the output is not necessarily equal to the input, but it was derived from the input in an unrestrictive way. An attacker who controls the input will have significant control over the output as well.
- **value**: This means that the output equals the input or a copy of the input such that all of its properties are preserved.

neutralModel(package, type, name, signature, provenance)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> No flow. This extensible predicate is used to model elements without flow.

Reviewer: Can you add a sentence here about when it would be used? Or if there's no end-user use case for it, you can mention something like: 

> This extensible predicate is not typically needed externally, but included here for completeness.

Author: For now this is only used for telemetry purposes - I prefer that we keep the description as short as possible. I will change the description to your suggestion.

- **provenance**: Provenance (origin) of the flow through.

.. _access-paths:

Access paths
------------
The **input**, and **output** columns consist of a **.**-separated list of components, which is evaluated from left to right, with each step selecting a new set of values derived from the previous set of values.

The following components are supported:

- **Argument[**\ `n`\ **]** selects the argument at index `n` (zero-indexed).
- **Argument[**\ `-1`\ **]** selects the qualifier (instance parameter).
- **Argument[**\ `n1..n2`\ **]** selects the arguments in the given range (both ends included).
- **Parameter[**\ `n`\ **]** selects the parameter at index `n` (zero-indexed).
- **Parameter[**\ `n1..n2`\ **]** selects the parameters in the given range (both ends included).
- **ReturnValue** selects the return value.
- **Field[**\ `name`\ **]** selects the field with the fully qualified name `name`.

> - **SyntheticField[**\ `name`\ **]** selects the synthetic field with name `name`.

Reviewer 6: Should [`SyntheticGlobal`](https://github.com/github/codeql/pull/10814) be included as well?

Author: Yes, definitely! Good catch!

- **ArrayElement** selects the elements of an array.
- **Element** selects the elements of a collection-like container.
- **MapKey** selects the element keys of a map.
- **MapValue** selects the element values of a map.

Provenance
----------

The **provenance** column is used to specify the provenance (origin) of the model definition.

The following values are supported:

- **manual**: The model was manually created (or verified by a human) and added to the extensible predicate.
- **generated**: The model was generated by the model generator and added to the extensible predicate.
- **ai-generated**: The model was generated by AI and added to the extensible predicate.

The provenance is used to distinguish between models that are manually added to the extensible predicate and models that are automatically generated.

> Furthermore, it impacts the data flow analysis in the following way

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Furthermore, it impacts the data flow analysis in the following way:
```

- A **manual** model takes precedence over **generated** models. If a **manual** model exists for an element then all generated models are ignored.

> - A **generated** or **ai-generated** model is ignored during analysis, if the source code of the element it is modelling is available.

Reviewer 6: US English spelling.

```suggestion
- A **generated** or **ai-generated** model is ignored during analysis, if the source code of the element it is modeling is available.
```

> That is, generated models are less trusted than manual models and only used if neither source code or a manual model is available.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
That is, generated models are less trusted than manual models and only used if neither source code nor a manual model is available.
```

The Java analysis can be customized by adding library models (summaries, sinks and sources) in data extension files.
A model is a definition of a behavior of a library element, such as a method, that is used to improve the data flow analysis precision by identifying more results.
Most of the security related queries are *taint tracking* queries that try to find paths from a *source* of untrusted input to a *sink* that represents a vulnerability.
Furthermore, the taint tracking queries also need to know how data can flow through elements that are not included in the source code - these are named *summaries*.

That is:

- **sources** are the starting points of a taint tracking data flow analysis.
- **sinks** are the end points of a taint tracking data flow analysis.
- **summaries** are models of elements that allow us to synthesize the elements flow behavior without having them in the source code. This is especially helpful when using a third party (or the standard) library.

The models are defined using data extensions where each tuple constitutes a model.
A data extension file for Java is a YAML file in the form:

.. code-block:: yaml

   extensions:
     - addsTo:

>          pack: codeql/java-all

Reviewer 5: Makes sense 👍

The extensible predicates are populated using data extensions specified in YAML files.

In the sections below, we will provide examples of how to add tuples to the different extensible predicates.
The extensible predicates are used to customize and improve the existing data flow queries, by providing sources, sinks, and flow through (summaries) for library elements.
The :ref:`reference-material` section will provide details on the *mini DSLs* that defines models for each extensible predicate.

Example: Taint sink in the **java.sql** package.
------------------------------------------------

In this example we will show how to model the argument of the **execute** method as a SQL injection sink.
This is the **execute** method in the **Statement** class, which is located in the **java.sql** package.
Please note that this sink is already added to the CodeQL Java analysis.

.. code-block:: java

   public static void taintsink(Connection conn, String query) throws SQLException {
       Statement stmt = conn.createStatement();
       stmt.execute(query); // The argument to this method is a SQL injection sink.
   }

> This means that we want to add a tuple to the **sinkModel**\(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, input, kind, provenance) extensible predicate, which can be achieved by adding the following to a data extension file:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We need to add a tuple to the **sinkModel**\(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, input, kind, provenance) extensible predicate. To do this, add the following to a data extension file:
```

.. code-block:: yaml

   extensions:
     - addsTo:
         pack: codeql/java-all
         extensible: sinkModel
       data:
         - ["java.sql", "Statement", True, "execute", "(String)", "", "Argument[0]", "sql", "manual"]

> Reasoning:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

```

Since we are adding a new sink, we need to add a tuple to the **sinkModel** extensible predicate.
The first five values identify the callable (in this case a method) to be modeled as a sink.

- The first value **java.sql** is the package name.
- The second value **Statement** is the name of the class (type) that contains the method.
- The third value **True** is a flag that indicates whether or not the sink also applies to all overrides of the method.
- The fourth value **execute** is the method name.
- The fifth value **(String)** is the method input type signature.

> The sixth value is only relevant internally and can be omitted in most use cases.

Reviewer 5: It might be worth clarifying what you mean by "only relevant internally" but I may be betraying my layman status here so feel free to ignore this

Author: It is a good point. I will just write that it should be left empty and it is out of scope for this documentation.

Reviewer 5: Sounds good 👍

The remaining values are used to define the **access path**, the **kind**, and the **provenance** (origin) of the sink.

- The seventh value **Argument[0]** is the **access path** to the first argument passed to the method, which means that this is the location of the sink.
- The eighth value **sql** is the kind of the sink. The sink kind is used to define the queries where the sink is in scope. In this case - the SQL injection queries.
- The ninth value **manual** is the provenance of the sink, which is used to identify the origin of the sink.
 

> Example: Taint source from the **java.net** package.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Example: Taint source from the **java.net** package
```

----------------------------------------------------
In this example we show how to model the return value from the **getInputStream** method as a **remote** source.
This is the **getInputStream** method in the **Socket** class, which is located in the **java.net** package.
Please note that this source is already added to the CodeQL Java analysis.

.. code-block:: java

   public static void tainted(Socket socket) throws IOException {
       InputStream stream = socket.getInputStream(); // The return value of this method is a remote source of taint.
       ...
   }

> This means that we want to add a tuple to the **sourceModel**\(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, output, kind, provenance) extensible predicate, which can be achieved by adding the following to a data extension file:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We need to add a tuple to the **sourceModel**\(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, output, kind, provenance) extensible predicate. To do this, add the following to a data extension file:
```

.. code-block:: yaml

   extensions:
     - addsTo:
         pack: codeql/java-all
         extensible: sourceModel
       data:
         - ["java.net", "Socket", False, "getInputStream", "()", "", "ReturnValue", "remote", "manual"]

> Reasoning:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

```

Since we are adding a new source, we need to add a tuple to the **sourceModel** extensible predicate.
The first five values identify the callable (in this case a method) to be modeled as a source.

- The first value **java.net** is the package name.
- The second value **Socket** is the name of the class (type) that contains the source.
- The third value **False** is a flag that indicates whether or not the source also applies to all overrides of the method.
- The fourth value **getInputStream** is the method name.
- The fifth value **()** is the method input type signature.

> The sixth value is only relevant internally and can be omitted in most use cases.

Reviewer 5: Same comment as above but ... It might be worth clarifying what you mean by "only relevant internally" but I may be betraying my layman status here so feel free to ignore this

The remaining values are used to define the **access path**, the **kind**, and the **provenance** (origin) of the source.

- The seventh value **ReturnValue** is the access path to the return of the method, which means that it is the return value that should be considered a source of tainted input.
- The eighth value **remote** is the kind of the source. The source kind is used to define the queries where the source is in scope. **remote** applies to many of the security related queries as it means a remote source of untrusted data. As an example the SQL injection query uses **remote** sources.
- The ninth value **manual** is the provenance of the source, which is used to identify the origin of the source.

> Example: Add flow through the **concat** method.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Example: Add flow through the **concat** method
```

------------------------------------------------
In this example we show how to model flow through a method for a simple case.
This pattern covers many of the cases where we need to define flow through a method.
Please note that the flow through the **concat** method is already added to the CodeQL Java analysis.

.. code-block:: java

   public static void taintflow(String s1, String s2) {
       String t = s1.concat(s2); // There is taint flow from s1 and s2 to t.
       ...
   }

> This means that we want to add tuples to the **summaryModel**\(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, input, output, kind, provenance) extensible predicate, which can be achieved by adding the following to a data extension file:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We need to add tuples to the **summaryModel**\(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, input, output, kind, provenance) extensible predicate. To do this, add the following to a data extension file:
```

         - ["java.lang", "String", False, "concat", "(String)", "", "Argument[0]", "ReturnValue", "taint", "manual"]

Reasoning:

Since we are adding flow through a method, we need to add tuples to the **summaryModel** extensible predicate.
Each tuple defines flow from one argument to the return value.
The first row defines flow from the qualifier (**s1** in the example) to the return value (**t** in the example) and the second row defines flow from the first argument (**s2** in the example) to the return value (**t** in the example).

The first five values identify the callable (in this case a method) to be modeled as a summary.
These are the same for both of the rows above as we are adding two summaries for the same method.

- The first value **java.lang** is the package name.
- The second value **String** is the class (type) name.
- The third value **False** is a flag that indicates whether or not the summary also applies to all overrides of the method.
- The fourth value **concat** is the method name.
- The fifth value **(String)** is the method input type signature.

> The sixth value is only relevant internally and can be omitted in most use cases.

Reviewer 5: Same comment as above but ... It might be worth clarifying what you mean by "only relevant internally" but I may be betraying my layman status here so feel free to ignore this

- The seventh value is the access path to the input (where data flows from). **Argument[this]** is the access path to the qualifier (**s1** in the example) and **Argument[0]** is the access path to the first argument (**s2** in the example).
- The eighth value **ReturnValue** is the access path to the output (where data flows to), in this case **ReturnValue**, which means that the input flows to the return value.
- The ninth value **taint** is the kind of the flow. **taint** means that taint is propagated through the call.
- The tenth value **manual** is the provenance of the summary, which is used to identify the origin of the summary.

Example: Add flow through the **map** method.
---------------------------------------------
In this example, we will see a more complex example of modeling flow through a method.
This pattern shows how to model flow through higher order methods and collection types.
Please note that the flow through the **map** method is already added to the CodeQL Java analysis.

.. code-block:: java

   public static void taintflow(Stream<String> s) {
     Stream<String> l = s.map(e -> e.concat("\n"));
     ...
   }

> This can be achieved by adding the following to a data extension file:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To do this, add the following to a data extension file:
```

.. code-block:: yaml

   extensions:
     - addsTo:
         pack: codeql/java-all
         extensible: summaryModel
       data:
         - ["java.util.stream", "Stream", True, "map", "(Function)", "", "Argument[this].Element", "Argument[0].Parameter[0]", "value", "manual"]
         - ["java.util.stream", "Stream", True, "map", "(Function)", "", "Argument[0].ReturnValue", "ReturnValue.Element", "value", "manual"]

> Reasoning:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

```

Since we are adding flow through a method, we need to add tuples to the **summaryModel** extensible predicate.
Each tuple defines part of the flow that comprises the total flow through the **map** method.
The first five values identify the callable (in this case a method) to be modeled as a summary.
These are the same for both of the rows above as we are adding two summaries for the same method.

- The first value **java.util.stream** is the package name.
- The second value **Stream** is the class (type) name.
- The third value **True** is a flag that indicates whether or not the summary also applies to all overrides of the method.
- The fourth value **map** is the method name.
- The fifth value **Function** is the method input type signature.

> The sixth value is only relevant internally and can be omitted in most use cases.

Reviewer 5: Same comment as above but ... It might be worth clarifying what you mean by "only relevant internally" but I may be betraying my layman status here so feel free to ignore this

The remaining values are used to define the **access path**, the **kind**, and the **provenance** (origin) of the summary definition.

- The seventh value is the access path to the **input** (where data flows from).
- The eighth value is the access path to the **output** (where data flows to).

> For the first row the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For the first row:
```

- The seventh value is **Argument[0].ReturnValue**, which is the access path to the return value of the **Function** argument of **map** (the return value of the lambda in the example).
- The eighth value is **ReturnValue.Element**, which is the access path to the elements of the return value of **map** (the elements of the stream **l** in the example).

The remaining values for both rows

- The ninth value **value** is the kind of the flow. **value** means that the value is preserved.
- The tenth value **manual** is the provenance of the summary, which is used to identify the origin of the summary.

That is, the first row models that there is value flow from the elements of the qualifier stream into the first argument of the Function provided to **map** and the second row models that there is value flow from the return value of the Function to the elements of the stream returned from **map**.

Example: Add a **neutral** method.
----------------------------------
In this example we will show how to model the **now** method as being neutral.
This is purely for completeness and has no impact on the analysis.
A neutral model is used to define that there is no flow through a method.

> Please note that the neutral model for the **now** method is already added.

Reviewer 5: I know this was already picked up in the resolved comment but it might be worth being explicit where it's already added, even if it's not consistent with the other examples by design.

Author: It turns out that it actually make sense now to write that it is added to the CodeQL java analysis as recent change incorporates the neutrals in the dataflow analysis (at least in terms of call targets). I will add the previous suggestion.

.. code-block:: yaml

   extensions:
   - addsTo:
       pack: codeql/java-all
       extensible: neutralModel
     data:
       - ["java.time", "Instant", "now", "()", "manual"]

Reasoning:

Since we are adding a neutral model, we need to add tuples to the **neutralModel** extensible predicate.
The first five values identify the callable (in this case a method) to be modeled as a neutral and the fifth value is the provenance (origin) of the neutral.

- The first value **java.time** is the package name.
- The second value **Instant** is the class (type) name.
- The third value **now** is the method name.
- The fourth value **()** is the method input type signature.
- The fifth value **manual** is the provenance of the neutral.

.. _reference-material:

Reference material
------------------

The following sections provide reference material for extensible predicates.
This includes descriptions of each of the arguments (e.g. access paths, kinds and provenance).

Extensible predicates
---------------------

Below is a description of the columns for each extensible predicate.

> Sources, Sinks, Summaries and Neutrals are commonly known as Models.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Sources, sinks, summaries and neutrals are commonly known as models.
```
